## Public School and Popular Education
#### Paulo Freire

This statement proposes a reflection around the relation between *public education* and *popular education*.

It does not propose a thinking about *public education* in itself or *popular education* alone, but about each one in relation to the other.

In essence, the statement implies an inquiry that may be elucidated as such: is it possible to make popular education in the public school system? Or, conversely, to state my thesis right away: popular education can realize itself only in the space of informality, in the political-pedagogical practice outside the school, inside popular movements.

My starting point to respond to those inquiries is the critical comprehension of educational practice.

There is no educational practice, as with any practice, that escapes limits. Ideological, epistemological, political, economic, cultural limits.

I believe the best statement to define the reach of educational practice in view of its limits is the following: *unable of everything, educational practice is able of something*.

This statement refuses, on one hand, the naïve optimism that puts education as the key to social transformations, the solution for all problems; on the other hand, the equally uncritical and mechanistic pessimism in which education, while superstructure, is only able of something after infrastructural transformations.

The exhaustion of those naïvetés, both anti-dialectical, would culminate in their superation: neither the pure negation of education, always subordinate to the productive infrastructure, nor the almightiness [*todo-poderosismo*] of education.

The mechanistic view of History that is certain that the future is inexorable, that the future comes as predicted, denies education of any power before the transformation of society's material conditions, in the same way that it denies any greater importance to subjectivity in History.

Dialectically perceiving the relations between conscience and the world, the superation of the mechanistic view of History necessarily implies a new way of understanding History. History as possibility. This intelligence of History, which discards a predeterminate future, does not deny, however, the role of *conditioning* factors to which we are submitted. As it refuses History as a game of given ends, as it opposes the future as inexorable, History-as-possibility recognizes the importance of the decision as an act that implies rupture, the importance of conscience and subjectivity, of the critical intervention of human beings in the world's reconstruction. It recognizes the role of conscience being constructed in the praxis, of intelligence being invented and reinvented in the process and not as a stationary thing in myself, almost separate from my body. It recognizes my body as a conscious body that can critically move in the world as it can "lose" the historical address. It recognizes my individuality that does not dilute or lose form in the social, nor does it outgrow the social. Finally, it recognizes the role of education and its limits.

Neither of the two ways of understanding education, in the comprehension of History, would be able to answer the posed question. Neither the naïve optimism, of idealistic nature, nor the immobilizing pessimism. Both anti-dialectical ways, they never could answer the question. Only in the dialectical comprehension of conscious-body-world relations, [*relações corpo-consciente-mundo*] in the understanding of History as possibility, it's possible to understand the problem.

One of the exaggerated misconceptions that grew with the recognition of education's role in reproducing dominant ideology was to not perceive (absorbed in the mechanistic explanation of History) that subjectivity plays an important role in the historical struggle. It was to not recognize that although we are conditioned beings, "programmed to learn," we are not determinate. It is exactly for this reason that along with the *reproductive* task that education undoubtedly has, there is also the task of contradicting the former. For progressives, that is our task, not to fatalistically stand still. [*cruzar os braços*]

If the reproduction of dominant ideology fundamentally implies the hiding of truths, the distortion of the rationale [*razão de ser*] of facts that would work against dominant interests when explained or unveiled, the task of progressive educators is to unveil truths, to never lie. Unveiling is truly not a task for the educators working for the system.

Evidently, in a class society like ours, it is much harder to work for *unveiling*, which is swimming against the current, than to work for *hiding*, which is swimming with the current. It is harder, but possible.

It would be naïve to think that the power of the ruling class would indifferently assist or even stimulate the unveiling effort made by progressive educators. That for example, they would use the opportunity of an ironworkers' strike to discuss with the learners the rights and duties of workers, including the right to strike, with which they can pressure the employers to comply with their legimitate demands. That in the analysis of this right, they would critize the corporatist distortions and sectarian excesses that hinder the workers' struggle. Or that debating problems around the protection of the environment, of fundamental repercussions to the life of the community, they would criticize the neglect of the popular areas of the city, generally without plazas, gardens, or green space. Or yet, that talking to the learners about the specific tasks of the executive, the legislature, and the judiciary, about the interdependence of those powers, they would talk about one of the executive's duties, the duty of producing a budget, a prevision of public expenditures to be approved by the legislature, and would stress its political nature, not only its technical one. That they would make clear that the accurate reading of the budget reveals the political-ideological options of those in power. The (sometimes astronomical) differences between the public expenditures in already embellished and well-instrumented areas of the city and the meager resources allocated to the peripheral and slum [*faveladas*] zones of the city. It would be truly naïve to think that those things could be easily done and praised in an authoritarian and rightist [*direitista*] administration.
